CSC14003 | Introduction to Artificial Intelligence Project 2. Logic
Project 2. Logic
Futoshiki Puzzles
1 Overview
Futoshiki (meaning “inequality” in Japanese) is a logic-based number placement puzzle originally
published in Japan and popularized worldwide. The puzzle is played on an N × N grid where the
player must fill in numbers from 1 to N according to a set of structural and ordering constraints.
Unlike Sudoku, Futoshiki explicitly enforces inequality relations (“less than” or “greater than”)
between adjacent cells, making it a rich domain for First-Order Logic (FOL) reasoning.
2
3
1
4
< >
< >
2 3 4 1
1 2 3 4
4 1 2 3
3 4 1 2
< >
< >
Figure 1: A 4 × 4 Futoshiki puzzle (left) and one valid solution (right).
Futoshiki provides an excellent setting for studying First-Order Logic because its rules are
naturally expressed as universally quantified sentences over all cells, rows, columns, and values.
The project challenges students to formalize the puzzle in FOL, implement inference mechanisms
from scratch, and compare their effectiveness on puzzles of increasing size.
2 Project Description
2.1 Puzzle Rules
A Futoshiki puzzle of size N is played on an N ×N grid. Each cell is identified by row index i and
column index j (both from 1 to N). Some cells are pre-filled with a number (called given clues).
Inequality signs (< or >) may appear between horizontally or vertically adjacent cells. The solver
must assign a number from 1 to N to every empty cell such that:
Faculty of Information Technology, University of Science, VNU-HCM Page 1CSC14003 | Introduction to Artificial Intelligence Project 2. Logic
1. Each row is a permutation: Every number appears exactly once in each row.
2. Each column is a permutation: Every number appears exactly once in each column.
3. Inequality constraints are satisfied: Each inequality sign must hold between the values
of the corresponding adjacent cells, both horizontally and vertically.
4. Given clues are respected: Pre-filled cells must keep their values.
2.2 First-Order Logic Formalization
Consider the following vocabulary:
Index sort: {1, 2, . . . , N}, which is used for rows, columns, and values.
Predicate Symbols
Predicate Arity Intended meaning
Val(i, j, v) 3 Cell (i, j) is assigned value v
Given(i, j, v) 3 Cell (i, j) has the pre-filled clue value v
LessH (i, j) 2 There is a “<” constraint between (i, j) and (i, j+1)
GreaterH (i, j) 2 There is a “>” constraint between (i, j) and (i, j+1)
LessV (i, j) 2 There is a “<” constraint between (i, j) and (i+1, j)
GreaterV (i, j) 2 There is a “>” constraint between (i, j) and (i+1, j)
Less(v1, v2) 2 Integer v1 < v2 (background arithmetic relation)
Core Axioms (to be completed and formalized in the report)
Students must express each constraint as a closed FOL sentence using the predicates above.
Example partial axioms are given below to guide the formulation:
A1 (Every cell has at least one value):
∀i ∀j ∃v Val(i, j, v)
A2 (Every cell has at most one value):
∀i ∀j ∀v1 ∀v2 Val(i, j, v1) ∧ Val(i, j, v2) ⇒ v1 = v2
Faculty of Information Technology, University of Science, VNU-HCM Page 2CSC14003 | Introduction to Artificial Intelligence Project 2. Logic
A3 (Row uniqueness):
∀i ∀j1 ∀j2 ∀v Val(i, j1, v) ∧ Val(i, j2, v) ∧ j1 ̸= j2 ⇒ ⊥
A4 (Horizontal less-than constraint):
∀i ∀j ∀v1 ∀v2 LessH (i, j) ∧ Val(i, j, v1) ∧ Val(i, j+1, v2) ⇒ Less(v1, v2)
A5 (Given clues are enforced):
∀i ∀j ∀v Given(i, j, v) ⇒ Val(i, j, v)
Students must derive the remaining axioms (e.g, column uniqueness, vertical inequality
constraints, and the completeness axiom ensuring values stay within [1, N]) following the same
FOL style.
2.3 From FOL to Inference
Solving Futoshiki can be reduced to a logical inference task: given the background axioms and
the facts encoding the puzzle instance, derive all Val(i, j, v) atoms for empty cells. This project
explores multiple inference strategies:
1. Ground the KB: Instantiate FOL axioms over the concrete index domain {1, . . . , N} to
obtain a large propositional theory.
2. Convert to CNF: Apply Skolemization and distribution rules to rewrite every axiom into
Conjunctive Normal Form, then invoke a SAT/resolution engine.
3. Prolog-style backward chaining: Encode the rules as Horn clauses and use depth-first
backward chaining (SLD resolution) to query individual cell values.
4. Forward chaining: Start from known facts (Given, LessH , GreaterH , etc.) and apply
Modus Ponens exhaustively to derive new facts.
5. A* guided search: Use an admissible heuristic to search over partial assignments, pruning
branches that violate FOL constraints.
6. Brute-force / Backtracking: Baseline algorithms for performance comparison.
Faculty of Information Technology, University of Science, VNU-HCM Page 3CSC14003 | Introduction to Artificial Intelligence Project 2. Logic
3 Requirements
3.1 Inputs
Students are required to design at least 10 different input files, named as input-01.txt,...,
input-10.txt, covering various grid sizes: 4 × 4, 5 × 5, 6 × 6, 7 × 7, and 9 × 9.
Each input file uses the following format:
1 N
2 # Grid : N lines of N values separated by commas .
3 # 0 = empty cell ; 1..N = pre - filled digit .
4 0, 2, 0, 0
5 0, 0, 0, 3
6 1, 0, 0, 0
7 0, 0, 4, 0
8 # Horizontal constraints : one line per row , N -1 values .
9 # 0 = no constraint , 1 = "<" ( left < right ), -1 = ">" ( left > right )
10 1, 0, -1
11 0, 0, 0
12 0, 1, 0
13 -1, 0, 0
14 # Vertical constraints : one line per row (N -1 lines ), N values .
15 # 0 = no constraint , 1 = "<" (top < bottom ), -1 = ">" ( top > bottom )
16 0, 1, 0, 0
17 0, 0, -1, 0
18 -1, 0, 0, 0
3.2 Outputs
The output is the solved grid, printed to stdout and saved as output-XX.txt with the same input
numbering. Inequality signs are kept for readability. Below is an example for a 4 × 4 puzzle.
1 2 < 3 4 1
2 v
3 1 2 > 3 4
4 ^
5 4 1 2 3
6 ^
7 3 4 1 < 2
where “<” and “>” denote horizontal inequality constraints, while “^” and “v” denote vertical
inequality constraints.
Faculty of Information Technology, University of Science, VNU-HCM Page 4CSC14003 | Introduction to Artificial Intelligence Project 2. Logic
3.3 Algorithms to Implement
1. (Report) Manually derive and write all of the FOL axioms for a 4 × 4 instance, including
Skolemized and CNF forms.
2. (Implement) Automatic CNF/ground KB generation from the FOL axioms for any N.
3. (Implement) FOL forward chaining: implement the forward chaining algorithm from scratch
to propagate facts and detect contradictions.
4. (Implement) Backward chaining (SLD resolution): implement a Prolog-like interpreter to
query Val(i, j, ?) for each cell.
5. (Implement) A* search: design an admissible heuristic for partial assignments (e.g., number
of remaining unconstrained cells, degree of constraint violations) and implement A* over the
search space of partial assignments.
6. (Implement) Brute-force and backtracking solvers for performance comparison.
3.4 Heuristic Function for A*
Students must design and justify an admissible heuristic h(s) for A* where a state s is a partial
assignment of values to cells. Some design directions:
• Count the number of remaining unassigned cells (trivially admissible but weak).
• Count the minimum number of the additional assignments needed to resolve all unfulfilled
inequality chains.
• Use arc-consistency (AC-3) as an informed lower bound: count cells whose domain, after
constraint propagation, is empty (indicating infeasibility).
Students are encouraged to experiment with multiple heuristics and report the trade-off between
admissibility, computation cost, and search efficiency.
3.5 Programming Language
The source code must be written in Python (3.7 or later). External libraries such as pysat, clingo
(ASP), or z3 may be used as a supplementary solver for verification, but the main inference and
search algorithms (forward chaining, backward chaining, A*) must be implemented by yourself.
Faculty of Information Technology, University of Science, VNU-HCM Page 5CSC14003 | Introduction to Artificial Intelligence Project 2. Logic
3.6 Report
Submit a well-formatted PDF report including:
• Project Planning and Task Distribution:
– Document the responsibilities of each team member, including which tasks were assigned
and each member’s completion percentage.
– Example: if the group score is 9.0 and Student A has a completion percentage of 90%,
then A’s individual score is 9.0 × 90% = 8.1.
– It is important to evaluate contributions fairly and accurately.
• Self-evaluation against all project criteria.
• Formal FOL axioms: A complete, rigorous list of all FOL sentences that encode the
Futoshiki rules, with clear notation. Derive the CNF form of at least three non-trivial
axioms step-by-step (Skolemization, clausal form).
• Inference algorithm descriptions: Explain forward chaining, backward chaining, and A*
with pseudocode and illustrative examples on a small puzzle.
• Heuristic analysis: Prove or argue admissibility of your A* heuristic.
• Experiment results: For each algorithm, report running time, memory usage, and number
of inferences/expansions on all 10 test cases. Use tables and charts.
• Comparative analysis: Discuss which algorithm performs best and why, and under what
conditions each approach is preferred.
• References (if any).
Note: Please do not include excessive source code in the report. Pseudocode and algorithmic
descriptions are preferred over line-by-line code listings.
3.7 Demonstration Videos
• Record the program running on at least three test cases of different sizes.
• Start from the command line, show the input file, and walk through the algorithm’s key steps
(e.g., facts inferred by forward chaining, nodes expanded by A*).
• Upload to YouTube or Google Drive and include the public URL in the report.
Faculty of Information Technology, University of Science, VNU-HCM Page 6CSC14003 | Introduction to Artificial Intelligence Project 2. Logic
3.8 Submission Format
Please follow to the following submission guidelines:
• Your source code and report must be contributed in the form of a compressed file (.zip, .rar)
and named according to the format StudentID1_StudentID2_...
• If the compressed file is larger than 20MB, upload it to Google Drive and share it via a link.
Absolutely no modifications are allowed after the deadline.
Example details of the directory organization:
StudentID1 StudentID2 ...
Source
Inputs
input-01.txt
...
input-10.txt
Outputs
output-01.txt
...
output-10.txt
main.py
README.md (how to run source code)
requirements.txt (libraries to be installed)
...
Report.pdf (included demo video URLs)
4 Notices
Please pay attention to the following notices:
• This is a GROUP assignment. Duration: about 3 weeks.
• AI tools are not restricted; however, students should use them wisely. Lab instructors have
the right to conduct additional oral interviews with random groups to assess their knowledge
of the project.
• Any form of plagiarism, dishonesty, or misconduct will result in a grade of zero for the course.
Faculty of Information Technology, University of Science, VNU-HCM Page 7CSC14003 | Introduction to Artificial Intelligence Project 2. Logic
5 Assessment
The project will be evaluated on a 100% scale based on the following criteria:
No. Criteria Score
1 FOL formalization (Report): Correctly write all FOL axioms for Futoshiki,
derive Skolemized and CNF forms for at least three axioms step-by-step.
25%
2 Automatic KB generation: Implement a function that takes N as input and
automatically generates the full ground knowledge base.
10%
3 Forward chaining: Correctly implement forward chaining from scratch; then
produce valid solutions on all test cases.
15%
4 Backward chaining (SLD resolution): Correctly implement Prolog-style
backward chaining; demonstrate querying individual cell values.
10%
5 A* search: Implement A* with a justified admissible heuristic function; compare
expansion count and run time against other methods.
10%
6 Comparison algorithms: Implement brute-force and backtracking solvers and
systematically compare speed/correctness against forward chaining and A*.
5%
7 Report and experiments: (1) Well-structured and clearly written report; (2)
Rigorous analysis and discussion of results; (3) At least 10 test cases across sizes
4 × 4, 5 × 5, 6 × 6, 7 × 7, 9 × 9; (4) Performance comparison with charts.
25%
8 GUI +10%
The end.
Faculty of Information Technology, University of Science, VNU-HCM Page 8